---
title: Moving to the UK and Finding Work in Software
---
I quit my job in January to move and find work in the UK. I have never been off North America in my 24 years. I had actually come to the UK in the beginning of May (after my layover in Iceland). There was a lot of anxiety about coming over with no form of income (and about what I am doing with my life in general). It felt like all my friends were becoming more settled into their corporate jobs, buying houses and starting families while I'm still stuck figuring out what I want in life. Anyways, regardless of my existential angst, I managed to get settled quite quickly. Here are a list of things that I did to settle in London:

<!--more-->
<h1>1. Airbnb for a month</h1>
&nbsp;We moved to London on an airbnb room in Walthamstow (£700/month) for a month. There were lots of problems with the accommodation (terrible roommates who left the house in a mess), but it was still liveable in a decent location. This gave us an opportunity to find the neighbourhoods that we would like to live in before committing to a lease.
<h1>2. Opening up a Bank Account</h1>
I also opened up a bank account with Barclay's on the second or third day in London. Since we were staying at our Airbnb place temporarily, many banks (HSBC, Lloyds and Cooperative Bank) rejected us on the premise that we didn't have a proof of address. The Barclay's that we went to didn't have that restriction, so I was able to open up an account with them. However, according to some of my coworkers, Barclay's wouldn't open up an account for them due to their nationality (German and Slovenian), so still need to shop around.
<h1>3. Finding a Job</h1>
During my first weekend in London, we were quite lucky to be in town for the <a href="https://www.siliconmilkroundabout.com">Silicon Milkroundabout</a>. The Silicon Milkroundabout is a job fair showcasing startup jobs for new graduates. However, their registration was not limited to students; there were quite a few people there who were already working in banks looking for a career change. Since I was already thinking about finding a startup job anyways, it was the perfect opportunity for me to network with various startups in London. I even managed to get my current job from interviewing one of the companies that I talked to! There is also <a href="http://workinstartups.com">http://workinstartups.com</a>, which was my source of inspiration from before I landed in the UK (but I was too lazy to actually apply... especially since I would be applying remotely). For those who are much keener than I in ensuring that you have employment before landing in the UK, then that would be a great job listing to go through.
<h1>4. Flat Hunt</h1>
Also, I was VERY lucky to be able to find the flat that I currently reside in. It was the second flat that I got a viewing for off of <a href="http://www.gumtree.com/london">gumtree</a> and it is a gorgeous flat (windows in bathroom, top-floor flat with London skyline, near a giant grocery market, canal, overground station, cyclehire... and within our budget!). Many landlords require a credit check and/or a employment reference (of which we had neither at the time of application). Our landlady was very nice to accept us on the condition we offer a larger than normal safety deposit and provide proof that we had enough money to pay the rent (ie. foreign bank statements).

Since London's property market is ridiculously expensive, most people live with flatmates. Single rooms are definitely much more affordable than getting a whole flat. There is also the <a href="http://uk.cameloteurope.com/9/0/how-it-works/property-guardianship-how-it-works.html">guardian scheme</a> that you apply for, where you trade off lease security for much lower rent. Unfortunately I had not heard of this scheme before I found my flat, so I was not able to take advantage of cheaper flats.
<h1>5. Apply for National Health Service</h1>
Applying to the NHS was ridiculously easy (if you do your research). They have a great <a href="http://www.nhs.uk/Service-Search/GP/LocationSearch/4">website</a> that helps you find a GP in your catchment area. Then once you find a doctor that will accept you based on where you're residing, you just have to fill out a first-time patient questionnaire and they'll send your information off to the NHS. You will need proof of address (I used my tenancy contract, and job contract) and a proof of identification as well. Then you just wait to receive your NHS number, but you can already start seeing the doctors at the practice that you just signed up for! I can only give praise to the service of the NHS as it was easy and that the doctors I had visited treated my health concerns seriously. The website is also a great medical resource (I've been using it even when I was not living in the UK!) and everything is very clearly explicated.

This is pretty much it for my adventures in settling down in London. This article was long overdue (as I've been quite settled in since early June).

PS. I tagged programming, there isn't that much programming in this post...


