---
title: Review of AngularJS - Up and Running
---
So after several weeks of redoing and maintaining parts of our backend system (including a partial migration to using SQLAlchemy), I now have no choice but to actually touch the frontend of our system. I have been dreading this as I had some scarring experience with frontend development (in particular with a certain javascript library called dojo...). I knew rationally that in order to build on my software experience, I cannot escape the frontend experience. So to learn our frontend system, I decided to go through the O'reilly catalogue to pick up&nbsp; a book on Angularjs, which is the frontend framework that we use. This is my review of <a href="http://shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920033486.do?code=WKANJS&amp;intcmp=il-prog-books-videos-lp-intsrch_angularjs_owo_ct">Angularjs: Up and Running by Shyam Seshadri, Brad Green </a>where I am reviewing this book as part of the O'reilly blogger early review program.

<!--more-->
<h1>Review</h1>
Admittedly, before reading this book I had very little JavaScript experience. However, I still found the book to be accessible against the warning in the preface. <em>Angularjs: Up and Running</em> is a self-explanatory title; it is a book that introduces you to building an angular js application from scratch. The book starts with basic MV* framework examples with angular to get things rolling, then advances onto chapters with filters and writing your own directives. I found the format of each of the chapters well written and organized with a clearly stated objective at the beginning of the chapter and a summary at the end of the chapter. There is also a heavy emphasis of testing which means that a testing chapter follows any heavy angularjs feature chapter. One of the most useful piece of information coming from testing is about how you can use mocking infrastructure to write unit tests around backend service calls. There are also examples of end-to-end testing and explication of the libraries involved with testing.

There was a lot of code to motivate the examples, which was good... except for the fact that I was reading this on my e-ink e-reader (with no syntax highlighting), so it sometimes felt like the author was just pasting in blocks of code. I would definitely recommend reading it in pdf format where you can see the syntax highlighting over reading it in e-ink. However, many of the "code blocks" had a step-by-step breakdown of what the code was doing which meant that it was still quite readable. The breakdown of the code really goes in depth to give context to what happens under-the-covers to facilitate a deeper understanding of the framework.
<h1>Conclusion</h1>
The book is definitely worth reading for those who are starting with angularjs and want a more in depth understanding of the framework. It is up to date and beats learning from stack overflow. There is a lot of information in here, so I will probably be returning to it as a reference.


