---
title: Book Review of "The Language Hoax"
---
Until I heard about this book, I did not realize that the idea of linguistic relativity was formally known as the <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linguistic_relativity">Sapir–Whorf hypothesis</a>. In fact, I did not realize that the theory itself was widely recognized outside of academia. My own interest in linguistic relativity is largely fuelled by how it relates to cognitive embodiment and how the environment and physical manifestation of a person shapes their cognition.

Therefore, when I came across <a href="https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/18579574-the-language-hoax?from_search=true"><em>The Language Hoax by John. H McWhorter</em></a>, which premise is to disprove the whole idea of linguistic relativity, I had to read the book.

<!--more-->And unfortunately the book was disappointing. The strong premise of the book to "disprove" linguistic relativity was diluted down to "be cautious of applying linguistic worldviews". McWhorter presents many interesting case studies&nbsp; <strong>for</strong> the hypothesis (ie. <a href="http://www.pnas.org/content/104/19/7780.full">study for how Russians who have a word for "dark blue" was quicker to distinguish different shades of blue</a> and the <a href="http://www.jstor.org/discover/10.1086/431525?uid=3738032&amp;uid=2&amp;uid=4&amp;sid=21104226448567">study of the Pirahã language, where they do not have words for numbers</a>), but do not have evidence to debunk them. For example he attempts to refute the whole study on Russian language for blue with intuition :
<blockquote>among English Speakers, just because of a difference in the languages, there was no lag at all. But: upon what grounds are we to take a 124-millisecond difference in reaction time [to differentiate the blue] as signaling something about the way Russians <em>experience life?</em>&nbsp; -</blockquote>
There is something to be said that differentiating blue does not necessarily mean that Russian speakers will perceive the world differently than Anglophones. However, "experiencing life" is very abstract and vague. To use McWhorter's intuitive logic against him, would he then say that being quicker to differentiate blue is not a part of experiencing life? And he doesn't even attempt to go against the study of Pirahã language, but circumvents the issue with an appeal to the cultural necessity of counting and an analogy to how it is irrelevant :
<blockquote>Suppose we encountered a tribe whose approach to food was relatively utilitarian, and found that in their language there was a single word that covered meat, vegetables, starches, and fruit. The person who came away saying that the reason these people weren't gourmands was that they didn't have the words for different kinds of food would likely be a clever child, whom we would be chuckling warmly. Obviously, the cultural trait created the linguistic one.</blockquote>
The analogy again appeals to our intuition without providing any evidence for his "obvious" claim that the cultural trait created the linguistic one. However, the analogy is still unconvincing for concepts as difficult as mathematics.

McWhorter also has a whole chapter devoted to the Chinese language and how the proponents of linguistic relativism will see that the simple grammar of Chinese will mean that the speakers of the language will have a "dim worldview" (the rhetoric is very distracting, as he doesn't cite any actual proponent of this and I honestly do not think there will be any academic who will state this). He evokes a <a href="http://groups.psych.northwestern.edu/gentner/papers/YehGentner05.pdf">case study on how difficult it would be in Chinese to express the hypothetical</a><em> (study originally by Alfred Bloom). </em>The example given in the book is :
<blockquote>"If you see my sister, you'll know she is pregnant."
"If you saw my sister, you'd know she was pregnant"
"If you had seen my sister, you'd have known she was pregnant"
These three connote different shades of nonreality, the first ... implies that something will likely happen. The second ... makes the business in imagined scenario. The third ... shifts the entire matter, complete with it's hypotheticality, into the past.</blockquote>
The study found that monolingual Chinese speakers had a harder time differentiating the three hypothetical examples (especially if they are not based in reality), but that bilingual Chinese and English speakers did just as well as English speakers, and McWhorter freely admits that. He attempts to discredit the study by stating that there were numerous replies to the study (for example: <a href="http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/001002778490012X">this</a>). I do not see how this disproves linguistic relativity, and McWhorter does not really provide any good insight against the study.

It was very frustrating for me to get through the book as I had very high expectations for it. I had some problems with the tone (his use of rhetoric detracting from actual credible claims), but mostly with the lack of evidence to support his claims. He evokes intuition, but that made the argument very unscientific and uncredible. In the end, McWhorter's argument did not conflict with many proponents of the idea of linguistic relativity, and his actual argument against the strict interpretation of Sapir-Whorf is essentially a straw man.

Where there was merit in the book is that it tells us to be cautious of thinking that people do not have shared structures of thoughts at all due to linguistic relativism. But it is very difficult to argue that not having symbolic representations of numbers mean that people can still do math. Of course, my opinion is somewhere in the middle; the whole premise of cognitive science is to uncover the structures of thoughts, including how language forms. However, at the same time, there are feedback loops in the system where certain environmental aspects, whether they are random or cultural, does make convergence of thoughts into words/symbols that in turn brings more salience to the ideas evoked by those words. I continue to think that this is a fascinating topic to study, especially in conjunction to the Chomskian view of structured thoughts and languages.

So in conclusion, I would summarize McWhorter's argument with a quote he made on page 125:
<blockquote>No one today claims that languages prevent speakers from thinking in certain ways, or even make thinking in certain ways a strain; rather, we are to investigate whether languages make thinking in a particular way more likely.</blockquote>
And I don't think even the linguistic relativists will disagree with him here.


