---
title: On Hiring for Passion
tags: technology, culture
---

The past couple of months my company has been growing quite rapidly. Because of
this, I have been involved in many interviews and have been part of many
discussions about the type of people my company wants to hire and what are
signals for a *good* developer. One of the points that really bothers me in
terms of our expectations for developers is that one should have *passion*. 

To write this, I looked up the definition of
[passion](http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/passionate).

 > 1. having, compelled by, or ruled by intense emotion or strong feeling; fervid:
 > a passionate advocate of socialism.
 > 2. easily aroused to or influenced by sexual desire; ardently sensual.
 > 3. expressing, showing, or marked by intense or strong feeling; emotional:
 > passionate language.
 > 4. intense or vehement, as emotions or feelings:
 > passionate grief.
 > 5. easily moved to anger; quick-tempered; irascible.

Assuming that we're definitely not talking about any sexual desires, passion
can be tl;dr'ed as *"displaying or feelings of intense emotions"*. Although I do
not have anything against particular displays of intense emotions (other than
perhaps being uncomfortable around them in their display of
happiness/sadness/anger), I do not think this is what we are actually hiring
for. 

I am then needing to presume that we are looking for *passion for something*
whether it be for technology, startups or data science. However, when you think
of other professions such as policemen, doctors or lawyers, you don't
immediately disqualify someone if they lack passion for particular art of that
profession. In fact, a lawyer who is *passionate* about prosecuting can be
argued to have the wrong attitude for his job as being a lawyer is not about the
art of prosecuting or defending, but upholding some sort of higher ideal of
justice (idealistically). However, for software development, it is increasingly
common for people to be judged by how "passionate" they are about their job by
the types of side projects that they work on or the amount of technology they've
played around with. It would similarly be odd to judge how passionate a doctor
is by the number of patients she's cured or a lumberjack by the number of trees
she's cut. Therefore, it is strange to set this type of ideal in software
engineering as well.

Also, the idea that a candidate must display a *passion for something* also
poses an ontological problem: what kind of passion will be a requirement? For
example, will having passion for big data technology be enough? Do they also
need to have a passion for startups? Do they also need a passion for devops and
also might as well have a passion for good UX design? Then obviously this poses
a practical problem of how to evalutate whether they have the particular
passions we're looking for. How do we measure how interested someone is about
big data? Is it by how many big data technologies they can list off the top of
their heads? Is it by in depth knowledge about one specific technology they've
worked with? Is it by the amount of time they play around with data in their
free time? Then is there a threshold number, like they must have played with 3
big data technologies in the past 2 years? What are the correct numbers to have
to answer these questions?

The point that I'm trying to get to here is that hiring is difficult, and that 
appeals to how *passionate* someone appears to be is intrinsically subjective.
We use it as an excuse to discard people we don't like (ie. people who don't
have similar interests to us) and as a justification for our own biases in
hiring. Startups in particular are more prone to using *passion* as a way to
find people of the *right fit* because one person in a small company plays a
huge part in shaping the company's culture. However it is important that we find
people who we want to work with and whose values align with our own. But
claiming someone *lacks passion* as justification for someone we don't want to
work with is lazy and doesn't get to the core of the problem which is that *the
candidate has not displayed the values that we want as a company* (whatever
those may be). 

