---
title: Retrospective on 2018
tags: reflection
---

This was both an exciting year, and also luckily not too eventful (ie, no more health incident).

I started off the year with a trip to Vietnam and Hong Kong. 
We went with family, and the experience made me reconsider staying in Berlin.

I went to Malaga for a work trip in April. 
It was quite nice, but also too early in the year to enjoy lying on the beach.

In June, we travelled to Ireland and did a road trip around the whole island. 
It was very beautiful and I did quite a few paintings. 
I found the relaxed nature of the trip much more conducive for painting.

We went to Poland in July to visit family. 
On our way back, we also passed by Malbork, Toruń, and Bydgoszcz.

I went to Europython in Edinburgh in July. 
I enjoyed it more than other conferences because I was meeting up with collegues.
I also went to Pycon Canada in November. 
It was also alright because I was not creeped out
(unlike the meetups/conferences I've been to in Berlin).
I think Berlin was a particular bad case, as I never had problems in Seattle or London either.

I went to Venice and Florence in August.
It was a very nice trip; both were touristy cities, but the weather was exceptional.
I went with my brother, so it was a nice sibling bonding time.
It was also the first trip I've been where I didn't plan things out in details,
and so we ended up sitting at cafes sipping coffee or wine for hours.
I think I really enjoy this form of travel, and maybe can do more of this in the future.

I also made the decision to resign at the company I was working at in August.
It was difficult, but I think it was the correct decision.
I definitely had a major sense of relief after I resigned.

Soon after I resigned, I also got offered a new job in Toronto. 

I moved back to Toronto at the end of October. 
So we had the rest of the summer in Berlin.
It was a beautiful dry summer, and we spent it eating icecream in the park. 
It's still too early to tell if I regret the decision.
I think Berlin will always have a place in my heart, but seeing family and friends every few weeks
is a definite plus.

Before returning to Toronto, we spent a week on the Azores. 
It was a relaxing holiday; we ate a lot of steak and dipped in many hotsprings.

I suspect that we will travel less now that we're back in Canada.
I've got half the amount of vacation days as my previous company.
Also, adjusting to a non-remote work environment wasn't too difficult. 
However, I definitely miss the freedom of working from home.

In terms of goals for this year, I think I want to do more with art and also more for my career. 

